Virtual and Physical Prototyping
ISSN: 1745-2759 (Print) 1745-2767 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/nvpp20
Robot-assisted multi-axis embedded silicone
printing for free-form volumetric model
Hailin Sun, Yingjun Tian, Chenyu Xu, Mahdi Bodaghi, Fei Gao & Guoxin Fang
To cite this article: Hailin Sun, Yingjun Tian, Chenyu Xu, Mahdi Bodaghi, Fei Gao & Guoxin Fang
(2026) Robot-assisted multi-axis embedded silicone printing for free-form volumetric model,
Virtual and Physical Prototyping, 21:1, e2614811, DOI: 10.1080/17452759.2026.2614811
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17452759.2026.2614811
© 2026 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
Published online: 16 Jan 2026.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1237
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=nvpp20
Robot-assisted multi-axis embedded silicone printing for free-form volumetric 
model
Hailin Sun 
a, Yingjun Tian 
b, Chenyu Xu 
a, Mahdi Bodaghi 
c, Fei Gao 
d and Guoxin Fang 
a,e
aDepartment of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China; 
bDepartment of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; cDepartment of Engineering, School 
of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, UK; dShenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shenzhen, People’s Republic of China; eInstitute of Intelligent Design and Manufacturing, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
ABSTRACT  
Embedded silicone printing (ESP) enables the creation of complex soft structures by extruding 
silicone inks into a gel support matrix. However, issues such as excess local ink deposition and 
the staircase effect limit the quality of solid model prints, especially when the gel matrix is 
immiscible with silicone ink. This work presents a multi-axis ESP framework for fabricating 
volumetric silicone models with nearly solid infill and high surface quality. A field-based curved 
slicing strategy is introduced to preserve critical surface features and optimise layer height 
distribution, reducing height variation and ensuring model manufacturability. A boundary- 
conformal staggered toolpath algorithm further promotes uniform ink deposition, while 
adaptive toolpath width adjustment mitigates local overfilling and underfilling during curved 
printing. The framework is validated on a multi-axis robotic platform by fabricating wearable 
components, biomedical phantoms, and soft robotic structures. Characterization via surface 
scanning and X-ray CT confirms an infill ratio of 99.47% and a surface error below 1.5 mm (1% 
of the model size). The proposed framework greatly broadens the practical applications of ESP, 
enabling the fabrication of customised and functionally integrated soft devices.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 13 November 2025 
Accepted 4 January 2026  
KEYWORDS  
Embedded silicone printing; 
multi-axis 3D printing; 
curved slicing; spatial 
toolpath generation; soft 
structure
1. Introduction
Silicone is a widely used soft material known for its excel­
lent heat resistance, bio-compatibility, and electrical 
insulation properties [1]. With its outstanding durability, 
silicone is commonly employed in soft actuators that can 
safely interact with delicate objects and living tissues [2]. 
Its skin-like feel and biocompatibility also make silicone 
an ideal material for medical devices [3] and artificial 
tissues designed to replicate natural functions [4]. With 
growing requirements for functionality and personalisa­
tion in soft devices (e.g. the customised socket for low- 
limb prosthetics as shown in Figure 1), the fabrication 
of free-form silicone objects with complex geometries 
or topologies has become more critical and demanding. 
Nevertheless, conventional methods like mold-based 
casting struggle to produce such intricate designs due 
to their reliance on free-form multi-part molds [5], 
which lack the flexibility to adapt to other shapes for 
mass customisation.
Recent advancements in 3D printing have signifi­
cantly expanded the possibilities for fabricating free- 
form silicone models [6]. A common approach is direct 
ink writing (DIW), where silicone is extruded and depos­
ited following programmed paths. However, even with 
the development of in-situ curing [7], DIW generally 
struggles with large-scale models or intricate structures 
with long-span suspensions, as the low-stiffness of sili­
cone material can lead to deformation and collapse 
under gravity. To address this, embedded silicone print­
ing (ESP) has emerged as a promising solution. As illus­
trated in Figure 1, the ESP process extrudes silicone ink 
into a shear-thinning gel-like matrix, which stabilises 
the structure and prevents collapse during printing. 
With specially designed viscosity, the gel-based matrix 
allows the nozzle moves freely inside to deposit silicone 
layer by layer, and the matrix is removable or curable 
afterward [8].
© 2026 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted 
Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent. 
CONTACT Guoxin Fang 
guoxinfang@cuhk.edu.hk
Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong SAR, China; Institute of Intelligent Design and Manufacturing, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, 
Hong Kong SAR, China
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
2026, VOL. 21, NO. 1, e2614811 (21 pages) 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17452759.2026.2614811
While the gel-based support makes ESP an effective 
solution for silicone printing with complex structures 
to avoid collapse [9], the immiscibility between silicone 
inks and the gel matrix inhibits filament fusion (details 
discussed in Section 3). Therefore, significant overlap 
between toolpaths is required to ensure adhesion, 
even with fine-tuned rheological properties (e.g. shear- 
thinning behaviour) of commonly used gel materials 
like Carbomer, leading to localised over-deposition of 
ink (as discussed in [10, 11] and also presented in 
Figure 3). For thin-shell models, the excess silicone can 
accumulate in surrounding directions without causing 
significant issues with the final product. However, for 
solid volumetric models, continuous ink accumulation 
causes significant geometry errors and can even distort 
the printed structure. As a result, the existing gel- 
based ESP process is generally limited to fabricating 
thin-wall structures or sparse infill models [11–13].
On the other hand, the usage of a support gel enables 
spatial alignment of silicone material through three- 
dimensional nozzle motion, which introduces greater 
design freedom and enhances fabrication flexibility. 
Especially for free-form models, employing a spatial tool­
path can significantly enhance surface finishing quality by 
reducing the staircase effect (as highlighted in Figure 
1(d)). Moreover, curved toolpaths can improve the conti­
nuity of material extrusion during ESP, mitigating issues 
such as stringing between discontinuous regions behav­
iour [14, 15] and the dimensional fidelity of printed 
models [16], its impact on deposition quality and material 
distribution has not been systematically studied. Conse­
quently, strategies for spatial toolpath design and multi- 
axis system integration that address these fabrication 
constraints in the ESP process are still lacking.
Here, we present a systematic study on multi-axis ESP 
for free-form volumetric models that extends the capabili­
ties of gel-based ESP. In particular, we investigate the 
influence of nozzle orientation on printing quality in the 
multi-axis printing process. A comprehensive compu­
tational framework is developed to generate toolpaths 
that consider both design objectives and fabrication con­
straints in ESP for solid structures (as illustrated in Figure 
1(b,c)). The framework integrates near-uniform-thickness 
curved slicing and width-constrained toolpath generation 
to address extrusion control challenges in free-form volu­
metric models. Additionally, the ink-volume control 
mechanism further improves printing quality by prevent­
ing excess material deposition, as demonstrated on a 
robot-assisted printing platform. The key contributions 
of this work are summarised as follows: 
.
Introducing multi-axis embedded silicone printing 
for free-form volumetric models, with solutions for 
spatial toolpath generation and printing direction 
optimisation to fabricate high-quality solid models.
.
Investigating the influence of printing direction on 
print quality, effectively eliminating the staircase 
effect and maintaining printing continuity for multi- 
axis ESP.
.
Developing a curved slicing strategy based on an 
iteratively optimised scalar field to preserve critical 
surfaces and ensure near-uniform layer heights.
.
Proposing a width-constrained toolpath generation 
algorithm tailor-made for multi-axis ESP, which 
Figure 1. (a) Proposed multi-axis embedded silicone printing (ESP) system for fabricating free-form volumetric silicone models within 
a gel-like supporting matrix via robot-assisted spatial material deposition. The workflow of spatial toolpath generation includes (b) 
field-based slicing optimised for uniform layer height and subsequently, (c) boundary-conformal toolpath planning with in-layer stag­
gered deposition. Here the toolpath density is controlled with extrusion constraint w.r.t., local layer height. (d) Compared with planar- 
based solution (printing result shown on the right), the proposed multi-axis ESP effectively reduces the staircase effect, enhancing 
surface finishing and geometric fidelity. (e) Fabrication results of a customised prosthetic socket with nearly solid infill (CT scan indi­
cates infill ratio at 99.47%).
2 
H. SUN ET AL.
efficiently enables uniform material distribution and 
improves infill rates for complex models.
.
Experimentally validating the proposed framework on 
a robot-assisted multi-axis ESP platform by fabricating 
various volumetric silicone models, including soft 
robotic components, biomedical phantoms, and custo­
mised wearable devices, demonstrating its practicality 
for rapid prototyping of functional soft systems.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to 
achieve multi-axis volumetric ESP with both study in 
process optimisation and toolpath generation. The dem­
onstrations reveal the potential applications in the rapid 
prototyping of soft robotics, medical devices, and tissue 
engineering.
2. Related work
Here we review the recent progress made on ESP and 
multi-axis 3D printing.
2.1. Embedded silicone printing
With the help of gel-based support, the development of 
embedded printing technology allows the fabrication of 
free-form soft objects such as soft robot pneumatic 
actuators [13]. Most existing studies on ESP focus on 
material and process development, emphasising the 
rheological and chemical properties of materials 
between the ink and support matrix to ensure successful 
printing. Notably, the effects of support matrix compo­
sition and rheology have been systematically examined 
in [17, 18], and various materials such as Carbopol [19], 
Laponite nanoclay [11], gelatin [20], and fumed silica 
nanoparticles [21] are further broadening the appli­
cation scope of ESP. In this work, we adopt the widely 
used Carbopol support matrix with platinum-catalysed, 
silicone-based elastomer [8, 22] for physical validation, 
with detailed material characterisation presented in 
Section 3.
On the other hand, printing parameters and toolpath 
design significantly influence the quality of embedded 
printing [23]. Studies have thoroughly examined 
filament morphology under varying needle diameters, 
motion speeds, and extrusion pressures [11, 12]. For 
thin-shell structures, commercial planar-based slicers 
(e.g. Cura or Bambu Studio) are commonly used for tool­
path generation. These studies offer valuable guidance 
for fine-tuning toolpath parameters such as line spacing 
[23]. However, less attention has been given to printing 
volumetric models with solid infill, where overlap 
between layers to ensure good material adhesion [12] 
can lead to over-extrusion (details also presented in 
Section 3.2). While specialised curable support media 
[24–26] can help avoid such issues, they constrain 
material selection. In this work, we propose a general 
slicing and toolpath generation framework for solid ESP 
with precise extrusion control, applicable to both planar 
and spatial printing processes using general gel materials.
2.2. Multi-axis 3D printing and its application in 
ESP
Multi-axis 3D printing has garnered significant attention 
in recent years, as the ability to change the nozzle’s 
orientation enables functionalities that surpass those 
of conventional planar-based printing [27, 28]. It has 
been integrated into various 3D printing processes, 
such as Digital Light Processing (DLP) to eliminate 
support structures and enhance surface quality [29, 
30], Fused Filament Fabrication (FFF) to align filaments 
with stress tensors for model reinforcement [31], and 
Directed Energy Deposition (DED) to reduce deposition 
anisotropy and improve dimensional accuracy [32]. To 
date, multi-axis 3D printing has also been explored in 
diverse applications, including conformal electronics 
printing [33], food printing [34], and bioprinting of 
complex organs [35].
With the aid of a support matrix, ESP can naturally 
take great advantage of spatial material alignment. Exist­
ing studies have demonstrated the potential of ESP for 
printing 3D lattices [36] and vascular networks [37]. 
Additionally, with carefully designed spatial toolpaths, 
it has the great potential to improve surface finishing 
[38] and enhance extrusion continuity of ESP process 
(similar to spatial toolpath in DIW [39], whereas that 
method primarily targets parts with rotational features). 
On the other hand, although the toolpath is spatially 
optimised, its direct implementation on a conventional 
3-axis ESP system remains challenging for achieving sat­
isfactory printing performance. One key reason is that, in 
3-axis ESP, the printing angle (see Figure 2(a)) varies due 
to the spatial nature of the toolpath and the fixed nozzle 
orientation. This variation adversely affects the overall 
printing quality of the ESP process. Sparrman et al. [13] 
demonstrated that the nozzle orientation significantly 
affects filament position accuracy, while Arun et al. [15] 
showed that printing direction strongly impacts 
filament morphology of ESP. These findings highlight 
the critical role of orientation in ensuring consistent 
and high-quality deposition. In this work, we systemati­
cally study the relationship between the multi-axis print­
ing process and filament morphology (Section 3.1), and 
conduct a solution of a robot-arm-based system to 
ensure good printing quality with controlled nozzle 
orientation.
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
3
Moreover, ESP differs fundamentally from conven­
tional 3D printing processes (e.g. FFF or DLP) due to its 
unique filament morphology characteristics. Specifically, 
in ESP, the ratio between toolpath height and width 
dynamically changes with printing speed and is tightly 
interdependent with each other (reported in [12] and 
also demonstrated in Figure 2(d)). This dynamic behav­
iour makes it challenging to directly adapt existing 
multi-axis slicing methods designed for other processes, 
as they often assume fixed or predictable filament 
dimensions [40]. Consequently, these limitations restrict 
the flexibility and full potential of multi-axis ESP for 
complex geometries. Building on these insights, we 
propose a curved-layer slicing and width-constrained 
toolpath generation method (Section 4) to enable suc­
cessful multi-axis ESP for free-form volumetric models. 
Case studies showcasing various applications are pre­
sented in Section 5.
3. Morphology and fabrication limits of multi- 
axis ESP
In this section, preliminary experiments on the filament 
morphology with multi-axis ESP are presented, detailing 
the materials used and the effects of printing speed and 
angle, concluding with toolpath design objectives and 
fabrication constraints for the subsequent spatial print­
ing toolpath generation.
3.1. Filament morphology with extrusion 
parameters
We first study the morphology of a single spatial path in 
multi-axis ESP where two primary printing parameters 
govern material deposition: the nozzle’s moving speed 
ve and the printing direction α (angle between the 
nozzle axis and the moving direction, see Figure 2(a)). 
These parameters directly influence the local deposition 
volume and material morphology. In our multi-axis ESP 
setup (Figure 1(a)), the extruder employs two servo 
motors to mix silicone components and maintain a con­
stant extrusion speed, ensuring a steady material flow 
into the supporting gel over time. Consequently, adjust­
ing ve regulates the deposited volume locally, while 
varying α allows control over directional deposition 
behaviour.
The printing tests were conducted using Carbomer as 
the support bath and three silicone oils with different 
rheological properties as printing inks: Ecoflex 0030, 
Dragon Skin 10, and Mold Star 30,1 with details provided 
in Section 5.2. The extrusion parameters (ve and α) were 
varied along different printing path to investigate the 
Figure 2. Analysis of rheological properties and filament morphology. (a) Illustration for filament dimension parameters and the print­
ing angle. (b) Viscosity of ink and support matrix tested by rheometer (model: Haake Mars 40). (c) Storage modulus of ink and support 
matrix at the frequency of 1 Hz – both exhibit shear-thinning property. The storage modulus of ink is one to two orders of magnitude 
larger than the matrix material, which makes it ideal for ESP [17]. (d) Impact of the printing speed on filament morphology. (e) Impact 
of the printing angle on filament morphology (data tested under printing speed of 3 mm/s). (f) Variation of the cross-sectional area 
with printing speed, where polynomial fitting is used to fit the data for continuous calculation for extrusion constraint (Equation (2)).
4 
H. SUN ET AL.
morphology of the printed silicone, which was charac­
terised by the filament width wf and height hf of the 
cross-sections. As shown in Figure 2(d), at low printing 
speeds, the filament cross-sections were oval-shaped, 
with both wf and hf decreasing as the speed increased. 
At higher printing speed, the cross-sections became 
nearly circular due to larger yield areas in the support 
matrix, reducing confinement on the ink during extru­
sion [11]. These observations highlight the strong 
influence of printing speed on filament morphology. In 
multi-axis ESP, where local printing speeds vary dynami­
cally to achieve spatially controlled extrusion, such mor­
phological sensitivity becomes even more pronounced. 
To maintain relatively uniform layer geometry under 
these conditions, layer height (constrained with ve) 
must be optimised in relation to the local printing- 
speed distribution and this is implemented by the algor­
ithm described in Section 4.1.
We also observed that the printing angle had a sig­
nificant influence on the morphology of the extruded 
silicone filament. As shown in Figure 2(e), when the 
nozzle orientation deviated from being perpendicular 
to the printing direction (i.e. a = 90◦), both the 
filament width wf and height hf were markedly 
affected. Moreover, as previously reported in [13], the 
positional accuracy of the filament is reduced under 
non-perpendicular extrusion and requires compen­
sation. In this study, to eliminate the influence of α on 
filament morphology and ensure precise deposition, 
we leveraged the multi-axis robotic setup to maintain 
perpendicular extrusion whenever possible. For regions 
with steep surface slopes or potential collision risks, 
the nozzle orientation is allowed to vary within 
a [ [70◦, 110◦] to minimise adverse effects (detailed in 
Section 5.2). Consequently, this approach enables 
more consistent control over filament morphology com­
pared with conventional three-axis systems that employ 
a fixed nozzle orientation.
3.2. Objectives of toolpath design for volumetric 
ESP
Building on the investigation of single-filament mor­
phology, we now present the following study to estab­
lish a suitable toolpath strategy for printing solid 
silicone structures, which can also be generalised to 
multi-axis ESP with dynamically changing printing 
speed. In printing solid models, three key aspects must 
be considered: ensuring sufficient fusion with the under­
lying filaments, achieving uniform ink spreading, and 
ensuring appropriate ink extrusion. To address these 
challenges, we employ a deliberate interlayer overlap 
to promote reliable bonding, a staggered toolpath 
pattern to enhance ink uniformity, and a volume-preser­
ving staggered strategy to mitigate over/under ink 
deposition.
For planar-based ESP printing of thin-walled models, 
the strategy for extrusion control and toolpath design is 
relatively straightforward: a constant printing speed can 
be applied to achieve wf ≈hf (i.e. regular filament cross- 
section realised by high printing speeds) [11, 41]. 
Additionally, due to the immiscibility between silicone 
inks and the gel matrix, it is common to set the layer 
height H and toolpath width W smaller than the 
filament height hf and width wf, as expressed by 
H = b · hf and W = b · wf where b , 1 reflects the 
overlap ratio between filaments. Here, the selection of 
a smaller β indicates larger inter-path overlap and 
better filaments merging [12, 13]. However, this 
approach is not suitable for printing volumetric 
models. As illustrated in Figure 3(a,b) with the example 
of printing a solid cube, selecting a higher β results in 
poor inter-filament fusion, while a lower β (a strategy 
effective for thin-shell structures) causes severe over- 
extrusion and geometric distortion.
To address this limitation, we adopt a volume-preser­
vation strategy, in which the toolpath width is intention­
ally set larger than the filament width to ensure 
consistent material deposition (illustrated in Figure 3(c, 
d)). Under this approach, W is determined by satisfying 
the constraint of volume preservation, where the total 
silicone volume Vtotal used for printing is calculated 
w.r.t., printing speed ve and cross-section area Af as:
Vtotal =
􏽚t
0
veAf(ve) dt = C · Ttotal
(1) 
≈
􏽘
N
i=1
‖pi −pi−1‖ · H(p) · W(p)
(∀pi [ P).
(2) 
Here, Equation (1) quantifies the actual material extru­
sion governed by the extruder’s capability, where Ttotal 
represents the total printing time. The parameter C
denotes the unit extrusion volume per time step. It 
remains constant throughout the printing process, 
which is calibrated to be 6.57 mm3/s. Equation (2) is 
the designed extrusion by toolpath parameter includes 
layer height H(p) and toolpath width W(p) at each 
waypoint. In this work, proper extrusion control is 
enabled 
for 
each 
time 
sequence 
(i.e. 
time 
Dt = ‖pi −pi−1‖/ve(p), the time taken to move 
between two neighbouring waypoints), where we prior­
itise H(p) to be first computed by curve-layer decompo­
sition of the printed model (see details in Section 4.1) 
and the volume-preserving ensures:
C · ‖pi −pi−1‖
ve(p)
; ‖pi −pi−1‖ · H(p) · W(p)
(3) 
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
5
In this way, the designed proper toolpath width W(p) for 
waypoint p is constrained to
W(p) =
C
H(p) · ve(p) =
C
H(p) · f(H(p)/b)) .
(4) 
which is determined by the local layer height. Here, f(·) is 
a function calibrated from physical data presented 
in Figure 2(d), representing the relationship between 
printing speed and the morphology of the filament 
cross-section. When choosing local printing speed for 
multi-axis ESP by ve(p) = f(hf(p)) = f(H(p)/b), we need 
first to determine the parameter β. Although a smaller 
β means better interlayer fusion and improved surface 
quality [13], it also results in sparser in-layer toolpath 
(as described in Equation (4)), which increases the risk 
of entrapping the supporting matrix and forming 
larger infill defects. Considering the trade-offs between 
surface quality and infill performance, we selected 
b = 0.5 for all experiments as filaments printed at 
different velocities merged reliably under this condition 
while also maintaining good infill quality (the result can 
be found in Section 5.3).
With the toolpath-width constraint, the extrusion 
compensates for the ‘gap’ regions between adjacent 
filaments by slightly over-extruding in height, ensuring 
that the total extruded volume aligns with the design 
requirements. As illustrated in Figure 3(c), although 
this compensation improves inter-layer bonding and 
prevents over-extrusion, uniformity remains limited 
when successive layers shared the same toolpath direc­
tion, resulting in the formation of vertical voids along the 
stacking direction. To overcome this limitation, a stag­
gered toolpath strategy is employed, in which the print­
ing direction of each successive layer is arranged 
perpendicular to that of the previous one, as shown in 
Figure 3(d). This interlaced deposition pattern signifi­
cantly reduced internal pores, as confirmed by the CT 
analysis, which revealed a pore ratio of 0.1% of the 
total volume.
It is worth mentioning that the proposed volume- 
preservation and staggered-toolpath strategies can be 
generalised to multi-axis printing scenarios with variable 
printing speeds or non-uniform extrusion rates, and the 
objectives for toolpath design contain:  
Figure 3. Printing results of a solid cube fabricated under different toolpath generation strategies. (a) A toolpath with minor overlap 
(e.g. large b = 0.9) in both width and height leads to insufficient fusion due to immiscibility between silicones and matrix materials. 
(b) In contrast, a large overlap (small b = 0.5) causes over-extrusion and results in geometric distortion. (c) A non-staggered toolpath 
with large inter-layer overlap and a volume-preserving width constraint enables stable extrusion, but produces vertically aligned voids 
due to the repetitive stacking direction. (d) When both the volume-preserving constraint and the staggered-toolpath strategy are 
applied, a dense and uniform structure is achieved, effectively minimising internal pores and geometric deviation.
6 
H. SUN ET AL.
.
With computed variable layer height, local toolpath 
width needs to be constrained (computed by Equation 
(4)) at each waypoint to ensure adequate infill.
.
The toolpath between neighbouring curved layers 
should stagger with each other to ensure proper 
fusion;
Existing algorithms for spatial toolpath generation do 
not account for these requirements in embedded print­
ing. In the following section, we present a computational 
framework specifically designed for toolpath generation 
in multi-axis ESP of volumetric models.
4. Width-constrained spatial toolpath for 
multi-axis ESP
With a given volumetric model with free-form surfaces 
(represented as a tetrahedral mesh M), our compu­
tational pipeline starts from generating a set of curved 
working surfaces {Sk}k=1,2,...N to decompose M. As illus­
trated in Figure 4, these curved printing layers define the 
local layer thickness, which is controlled within the capa­
bility of the physical extruder setup (as discussed in 
Section 3). In the framework and as previously discussed, 
the critical region is preserved to ensure the best print­
ing quality and the continuity of the print (e.g. top 
curved surface of the prosthetic socket model high­
lighted in green on Figure 4(b–d)).
Subsequently, the spatial toolpath T (discretized as a 
set of waypoints P) is computed for each curved 
working surface, taking into account width constraints. 
Specifically, as discussed in Section 3.2, crossing-based 
toolpaths with two different patterns (contour-parallel 
and staggered zig-zag pattern) are employed to ensure 
proper infill during the ESP process.
In the following, we first demonstrate the method to 
optimise for layer height with iterative-based optimis­
ation, then present the technique of width-constraint 
toolpath computing.
4.1. Iteration-based curved slicing with layer 
height control
To compute curved working surfaces for multi-axis ESP, 
we follow a field-based computing strategy [42], in 
which a scalar field G is defined and each vertex of the 
model is assigned a scalar value g(x). The field G is 
then optimised, and the curved layers are extracted as 
iso-surfaces 
of 
the 
input 
model, 
expressed 
as 
S = x | ∀, x [ R3, g(x) = c, where c is the iso-value and 
S is represented by a triangular mesh. Note that the 
material accumulation direction in this way is controlled 
by the gradient of G, which is installed at the center of 
each element ∇g(e). The local layer height is also 
defined as the norm of this gradient, i.e. H(e) = ‖∇g(e)‖.
With the need to protect surface quality and ensure 
that the printing angle α and layer height H do not 
exceed the capability of the printing setup, as discussed 
in Section 3, we encode the objective of (i) critical- 
surface preservation, (ii) target layer height, and (iii) 
printing direction smoothness via:
arg min
G
va
􏽘
x[V
g(x) −̅GV
􏼍􏼍
􏼍􏼍2+vl
􏽘
e[M
(‖∇g(e)‖ −Ht)2
+ vh
􏽘
f[M, ei>ej=f
∇g(ei) −∇g(ej)
􏼍􏼍
􏼍􏼍2,
(5) 
where the first term preserves the surface quality of the 
critical region Ω and ensures continuous printing, with 
GV representing the average guidance value of Ω. The 
second term optimises for layer height with the target 
Ht set to the unit height for numerical computation, 
while the third term evaluates gradient compatibility 
(w.r.t. printing direction). Here, ei and ej are neighbouring 
elements that share the same face f; optimising gradient 
compatibility prevents the formation of highly curved sur­
faces that require large local printing angles. va, vl, and 
vh are corresponding weighting for each objective.
However, directly solving the optimisation in Equation 
(5) by gradient-based optimisation will lead to a local 
minimum solution as the layer thickness objective con­
tains a nonlinear evaluation of ‖∇g‖. Additionally, ̅GV is 
also an unknown variable in the first place in the optimis­
ation [42]. As a result, the layer height cannot be con­
trolled within a small range to satisfies extrusion ability 
(see the illustration in Figure 4(e) iteration 1).
Tackling this issue, and considering the objectives in 
Equation (5) are mostly related with ∇g, which naturally 
formulates a gradient vector field, we adopt an iterative 
optimisation approach with vector-scalar field convert­
ing to find a better solution for curve layer slicing. As 
demonstrated in Figure 4(b,c), each element has been 
assigned with vector v(e), which formulates a vector 
field , and the optimisation problem in Equation (5) 
can be convert into find an optimal vector field as
arg min
V
vl
􏽘
e[M
v(e) −
∇g(e)
‖∇g(e)‖
􏼍􏼍􏼍􏼍
􏼍􏼍􏼍􏼍
2
+ vh
􏽘
f[M, ei>ej=f
v(ei) −v(ej)
􏼍􏼍
􏼍􏼍2
s.t.
v(e) = nf(e)
(∀e [ V)
(6) 
where the layer height objective is enforced by setting the 
initial vector close to the normalised gradient (i.e. to 
achieve uniform layer height). Additionally, critical region 
protection is formulated as a Neumann boundary 
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
7
condition in the constraints, ensuring that in these regions, 
the material growth direction aligns with the normal nf of 
the boundary face f. All objectives in Equation (6) are quad­
ratic, so a linear system can be used to directly find the 
optimal vector field V, and the corresponding scalar field 
can then be computed by minimising
arg min
G
Oalign(G, V) =
􏽘
e[M
‖∇g(e) −v(e)‖2,
s.t.
g(x) ; ̅GV
(∀x [ V)
(7) 
which is equivalent to solving the Poisson’s equation (also a 
linear system) [43] as
DG = ∇· V
(8) 
Here Δ is the Laplacian operator, and the right side com­
putes the divergence of the vector field. Experimentally, 
Oalign also implicitly reflects the variation of layer height 
(refer to Ref. [43] and Figure 4(e)), and we invite an iter­
ation-based process to find a smooth scalar field with con­
trolled distribution of layer height by the following steps:  
.
Step 1: compute initial scalar field G0 by solving 
Equation (5).
.
Step 2: take G0 as input and find optimised vector 
field V that satisfies fabrication objectives defines in 
Equation (6).
.
Step 3: compute the Poisson’s equation Equation (8) 
to find corresponding Gnew, evaluate Oalign(Gnew, V) 
with Equation (7).
Steps 2 and 3 are run iteratively by taking Gnew = G0 
back into step 2 at each iteration. The iteration terminates 
when Oalign is converge (i.e. change less than 10−2 times 
last iteration). It is worth noting that, due to the boundary 
protection requirement (i.e. Neumann boundary in 
Equation (6)), it is mathematically proven that the field 
cannot be optimised into a unit field with constant layer 
height everywhere. However, using the iteration-based 
solver introduced in this work, the layer height is opti­
mised to be as uniform as possible, as shown in Figure 
4(f). For each vertex on the printing surface, the layer 
height H(x) is computed from the final gradient length 
of the scalar field, which serves as input for the width-con­
strained toolpath optimisation to determine W(p).
4.2. Width-constrained toolpath design with 
staggered pattern
With the curved printing layers generated (Section 4.1), 
the next step is to develop a toolpath generation algor­
ithm on each individual layer. As previously discussed, 
generating toolpaths for multi-axis ESP to achieve 
Figure 4. Diagram for showing the pipeline of our field-based curved slicing method. (a) Input Solid model T for slicing. (b) The 
process of scalar field optimisation. Left top: initially computed scalar field; Right bottom: update vector field by solving Equation 
(6), the green vectors highlight user-defined anchor vectors in critical regions and cyan vectors are obtained via interpolation. (c) 
The final gradient field and scalar field lead to optimised layer height variation. (d) The curved working surfaces are extracted as a 
set of iso-surfaces. (e) Error convergence of the objective function Oalign in Equation (7) w.r.t., iteration count, which is well 
reflected in (f) the layer-height distribution after different numbers of iterations. The results show that the layer height is effectively 
controlled, ensuring improved extrusion stability in the ESP process.
8 
H. SUN ET AL.
good extrusion in volumetric models requires addres­
sing two key objectives: (1) toolpaths are to be stag­
gered between layers to fill gap regions effectively, 
and (2) local toolpath width must be controlled based 
on the defined W(p), which is computed from the layer 
height.
Here, we present a solution that employs a staggered 
pattern combining boundary-conformal and perpen­
dicular zig-zag patterns. We first demonstrate this 
approach on a printing layer with uniform layer height, 
where both patterns are controlled by frequency par­
ameters to ensure an equally spaced stripe arrangement. 
Subsequently, a deformation-driven parameterisation 
method is introduced to incorporate non-uniform layer 
heights as a scalar field H into the toolpath generation, 
ensuring all fabrication requirements are met.
As demonstrated in Figure 5, for all the printing layer 
{S} generated as iso-layer of M, the pattern is defined by 
the index. For even layers, the nozzle moves along the 
contour shape to form a boundary-conformal pattern, 
while in odd layers, the nozzle’s movement trajectory 
is orthogonal to the contour shape. This approach 
ensures a more uniform distribution of ink in both the 
circumferential and radial directions, even within iso­
layers with complex geometry (more result can be 
seen in the result Section 5).
Without the loss of generality, we first present our 
toolpath computing algorithm on a curved surface 
with a constant toolpath width W. For boundary-confor­
mal pattern, we follow field-based strategy where the 
computation starts with the generation of a geodesic 
distance field using the boundary as source [44] (see 
Figure 5(b,c)). With computed distance as a scalar field 
D, each vertex of x [ S is assigned with a scalar value 
d(x) and the k-th toolpaths Lk on the even layer can 
be generated by extract from S as iso-contour
Leven = {Lk
even} = {p | ∀p [ R3, d(p) = t · kW, k [ Z+}.
(9) 
Since D is a geodesic distance field, a constant width of 
W can be maintained between neighbouring toolpaths. 
The factor τ (ranging from 0.98 to 1.02 based on our 
tests) is introduced to adjust the total length computed 
in Equation (9), ensuring it matches the required 
material volume for silicone (computed by Equation (1)).
On the other hand, computing odd layers with an 
orthogonal pattern to the boundary-conformal toolpath 
is non-trivial. Mathematically, there is no guarantee of 
finding another scalar field f(x) such that its gradient 
is perpendicular to ∇d(x) everywhere in the mesh 
while keeping a constant toolpath width. Specifically, 
the toolpath objectives of staggering and width 
constraint, 
expressed 
as 
∇f(x) · ∇d(x) = 0 
and 
|∇f(x)| = c (∀x [ S), respectively, may conflict with 
each other in layers with complex geometries.
We propose a periodic scalar field with frequency 
control to address the challenge of generating toolpaths 
within a width constraint. As shown in Figure 5(d), at 
each vertex the periodic scalar valued is defined w.r.t., 
complex-number form as
C(x) = eic(x) = cos (c(x)) + i sin (c(x)),
(10) 
where c(x) is the angle (or phase) at the vertex as 
another parameterisation of the periodic scalar field. 
With this periodic scalar field, the printing toolpath is 
extracted with initial phrase, and the toolpath width is 
controlled by the frequency (w.r.t., the phrase change 
∇c). In this way, the objective of toolpath generation 
Figure 5. An overview of our algorithm for boundary-conformal staggered toolpath generation. (a) Curved Printing layer. (b) Bound­
ary distance field D. (c) Boundary conformal toolpath computed for odd layer. (d) Illustration of toolpath generation using a periodic 
function on a triangle element. (e) Control vector field z(x). (f) The periodic scalar field ψ, which gradient ∇c perpendicular with z(x). 
(g) the stripe pattern toolpath generated for even layers. (h) Comparison on toolpath widths distribution generated by different 
methods.
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
9
with scalar field computing is formulated as
arg min
C
O phrase =
􏽘
∀Ei,j[S
‖Cj −eiDci,jCi‖2
s.t.
Dci,j ; t · 2p
W · 1
2 (〈zi, ei,j〉+ 〈zj, ei,j〉)
(∀Ei,j [ S).
(11) 
Here 
in 
the 
constraint, 
the 
vector 
z(x) = (∇d(x)/‖∇d(x)‖)⊥presents the normalised gradi­
ent rotated by 90 degree (denoted as ⊥), which both 
enforces the orthogonality condition and ensures 
uniform toolpath width, as the gradient of the scalar 
field is aligned with the rotated gradient of the distance 
field, and to have constant norm. The target phrase 
change Dci,j between vertex vi to vj along the edge 
Ei,j is computed by projection with dot product 〈·, ·〉. 
The constrained optimisation Equation (11) is in a quad­
ratic form and can be effectively solved by a linear 
system with conversion from the complex variable into 
real-valued vectors (details can be found in [45]).
With the optimised periodic field, the printing path 
for odd layer is extracted as crest lines of the periodic 
function (see Figure 5(d)), which can be written as
Lodd = {p | ∀p [ R3, c(p) = 2Np, N [ Z}.
(12) 
Note that the frequency is controlled by the variable t
W 
and is determined iteratively using a binary search 
method to match the required material volume. Both 
toolpath Leven and Lodd are then connected into a con­
tinuous path using the A* (shortest-path-search) algor­
ithm [46]. As illustrated in Figures 5(h) and 8(c), 
compared with the real-number-based toolpath with 
f(x) obtained using the Poisson-equation solver 
(similar to Equation (8) – matching Df = ∇· z), the 
stripe-like pattern proposed in our framework signifi­
cantly optimises the path width to better match the 
target value, thereby improving extrusion quality.
4.3. Spatial toolpath generation with variable- 
width control
This subsection focuses on computing the final physical 
printing parameters for multi-axis ESP, considering 
volume preservation in the printing case with variable 
layer height H(x) where corresponding changes on tool­
path width W(x) (computed with Equation (4)) are 
necessary to ensure consistent material deposition. 
This is computationally infeasible to be directly enforced 
in the aforementioned constant-width-based toolpath 
generation method.
Here, we propose a deformation-driven method 
to solve this fabrication constraint. As illustrated in 
Figure 6, the original printing surface S is first mapped 
into a deformed shape Sd. The purpose of this defor­
mation-based mapping is to enforce a uniform target 
toolpath width on Sd (i.e. W(x) is a constant everywhere 
in the surface). This allows the methods described in 
Equations (9) and (12) to be directly applied to Sd, with 
the final printing toolpath computed with inverse 
mapping to the original surface, naturally satisfying the 
original width requirements. The deformation-driven 
mapping is determined by solving the following optimis­
ation problem:
arg min
Sd={Vd
f }
Omap =
􏽘
∀f[S
‖N · Vd
f −Rf · Sf · (N · Vf)‖2
F.
(13) 
Here f represents a triangular element of the surface, with 
its vertices position xi = [xi, yi, zi] organised into the 
matrix Vf = [x1, x2, x3]T [ R3×3. The scaling matrix, 
Sf = diag(sf, sf, sf), encodes the local scaling factor sf 
which adjusts the width to match the target value. The 
scaling factor is computed as:
sf =
3 ̅W(S)
􏽐3
i=1 W(xi)
(14) 
where W(xi) is the target toolpath width at vertex xi, and 
the term ̅W(S) represents the average toolpath width over 
the 
entire 
surface. 
The 
translation 
matrix 
N = I3×3 −
1
3 13×3 ensures evaluations are translation- 
invariant, while the rotation matrix Rf eliminates the 
effect of affine transformations. The optimisation in 
Equation (13) solves for both deformed vertex positions 
Vd
f and Rf using a local-global solver, which converges 
efficiently in a few iterations [47].
The field-based width-constrained toolpath gener­
ation method is then applied in Sd, where Equations 
(9) and (12) define toolpath and are discretised into way­
points {pd}, ensuring the local width W(pd) remains con­
stant. For each waypoint pd, the barycentric coordinates 
(g1, g2, g3) are computed with respect to the corre­
sponding triangle f [ Sd as:
g1 = A(p, xd
2, xd
3)
A(f)
,
g2 = A(p, xd
1, xd
3)
A(f)
,
g3 = 1 −g1 −g2
(15) 
where A(·) evaluates the area of a given triangle.
The final waypoint p used in multi-axis ESP, which con­
tains both positional and directional information, is 
mapped from the offset surface Sd back onto the original 
surface S using the computed barycentric coordinates:
p = g1x1 + g2x2 + g3x3, 􏿻nf
􏼂
􏼃[ R6
(16) 
where xi [ S denotes the vertex positions of the corre­
sponding triangle on the original surface. As shown in 
10 
H. SUN ET AL.
Figure 6(e), with the help of this mapping-based 
approach, the precision of the toolpath width has been 
significantly improved and the error required to achieve 
90% cumulative probability reduced from 24.3% to 
6.9%. It is worth mentioning that the local printing direc­
tion 􏿻nf is assigned as the unit normal of the face f [ S to 
always keep local printing angle a = 90◦, ensuring 
smooth orientation transitions and geometric consistency 
in the printing process.
5. Result and discussion
We evaluated the performance of the proposed toolpath 
generation framework for multi-axis ESP on various volu­
metric models, including applications in soft robotics, 
medical phantoms, and wearable devices. This section 
provides a detailed description of the robot-assisted 
ESP setup, along with both computational and exper­
imental fabrication results. Additional details can also 
be found in the supplemental video. 2
5.1. Computational details and test cases
The computational framework, including curved slicing 
with optimised layer height (Section 4.1) and width- 
constrained spatial toolpath generation (Section 4.2), 
was implemented in C++ using Visual Studio. High- 
quality isotropic tetrahedral meshes, required as input 
for the computation, were generated using a particle- 
based method [49]. All linear equation solvers and 
matrix computations were accelerated with the Eigen 
library [50].
With the ability to handle volumetric models with 
arbitrary internal geometry, the first test case of the 
proposed ESP method is pneumatic-driven soft 
robots. As shown in Figure 7(a), these robots are 
designed with various internal structures (e.g. place­
ment of solid regions highlighted in yellow), enabling 
them to deform into different shapes. Conventional 
modelling is challenging to fabricate these design 
due to irregular internal channels requiring complex, 
hard-to-remove molds. Existing ESP solutions proposed 
for thin-wall structures [11, 41] also cannot handle 
these models, as large overlaps in x-y and z directions 
cause geometry distortion when printing solid regions 
(as previously discussed in Section 3.1). Our toolpath 
generation overcomes this by using staggered toolpath 
with boundary-conformal and zig-zag patterns for odd 
and even layers, respectively, ensuring geometry adap­
tation of toolpath, width-constrained toolpath distri­
bution, and robust filament fusion (see Figure 7(c)). 
This achieves precise extrusion control for leak-free fab­
rication (see Figure 11 and Section 5.3 for results). 
Notably, our slicing algorithm presented in Section 
4.1 degenerates into a planar-based one for this case, 
with critical surfaces Ω selected as the top and 
bottom layers and generating a constant scalar field 
gradient ∇g = [0, 0, 1] throughout the model (Figure 
7(b)).
The second model tested is a vascular phantom with 
obstructive solid regions. As shown in Figure 8(a), the 
aortic atheroma is located on the inner curvature of 
the aortic arch and the proximal descending aorta, 
areas with a high clinical incidence of atherosclerosis 
due to hemodynamic properties (highlighted in 
purple). This model combines both thin-shell and solid 
regions, with five critical regions selected as boundary 
conditions for protection, which present challenges 
that existing methods designed for thin-wall structures 
[8, 51] are unable to address. The slicing result and tool­
path for the critical curved working surface using the 
proposed method are shown in Figure 8(b,d), respect­
ively. Compared to planar-based slicing, multi-axis print­
ing significantly ensures continuous extrusion, as 
highlighted in the zoom-in view of the aortic atheroma 
region (near V3). Quantitatively, our iteration-based 
curved-layer slicing method yields more uniform layer 
heights, with their variation reduced by approximately 
Figure 6. An overview of our width-constrained toolpath algor­
ithm (a) Original isolayer with path-width field. (b) Isolayer after 
width-based deformation with constant path-width field. (c) 
Equal-width toolpath generated on deformed isolayer(d) 
Width-constrained toolpath extracted on original isolayer. (e) 
Cumulative distribution of path-width error with and without 
width-based deformation.
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
11
70% compared with that computed using harmonic con­
straint [42], as shown in Figure 8(c).
We further evaluated the performance of our tool­
path algorithm on a model with free-form volumetric 
parts and an integrated internal cavity, as shown in 
Figure 9. The deformable membrane consists of two 
parts (base and top membrane), and can be actuated 
pneumatically to mimic various human body shapes 
[52]. Conventional molding methods for such designs 
are time-consuming and can fail to ensure airtightness 
due to the gluing between parts [48]. In contrast, 
multi-axis ESP allows it to be fabricated in one piece 
with the optimised spatial toolpath, where the base 
and top region with variable thickness are fabricated 
together with an overlapping interface (as shown in 
Figure 9(b)), ensuring robust interfacial bonding and 
air-tightness. As can be seen from Figure 9(c), our 
iteration-based curved-layer slicing with surface-preser­
ving capability maintains extrusion continuity on critical 
surfaces (denoted as V1 −V4). The computed bound­
ary-conformal and perpendicular zig-zag toolpath is 
illustrated in Figure 9(d), demonstrating the effective­
ness of our deformation-driven variable-width control 
algorithm (presented in Section 4.3). Without width 
control, large variations in layer height result in over- 
and under-deposition (Figure 9(e), left). Our algorithm 
distributes ink effectively across the curved surface, 
ensuring that approximately 90 % waypoints are well 
adjusted according to layer height (Figure 9(f)), reducing 
extrusion errors by 82%.
The final model is a customised lower-limb prosthetic 
socket (see Figure 1), with its shape captured via CT scan 
and designed to perfectly fit the patient [53]. The con­
ventional mold-based fabrication method is expensive 
Figure 7. (a) Computational results for three soft robot models with various solid internal cavities (solid regions shown in yellow, with 
thin-wall parts rendered in semi-transparent gray). (b) With the top and bottom layers selected as the ROI, constant layer heights are 
generated, and the planar surfaces are computed. (c) Toolpath generation for various layers: odd layers use boundary-conformal pat­
terns, and even layers use perpendicular zig-zag patterns, both optimised for leak-free soft robot fabrication via ESP.
12 
H. SUN ET AL.
and labour-intensive, making rapid, low-cost personal 
customisation difficult. Furthermore, existing planar- 
based ESP cannot ensure continuous material extrusion, 
resulting in poor surface finishing on highly curved 
regions (highlighted in the zoom-in view of Figure 
1(d)). As previously discussed, our curve-layer slicing 
and spatial toolpath design for ESP demonstrates 
superior computational results. Through iterative pro­
cessing, the variation in layer height is reduced by 60% 
(the standard deviation decreases from 0.0852 mm to 
0.0327 mm), as shown in Figure 4. Meanwhile, the defor­
mation-based algorithm ensures that 95% of spatial 
waypoints are precisely controlled, achieving consistent 
extrusion and substantially improving performance 
compared with direct computation (see Figure 6).
Notably, the proposed toolpath generation algorithm 
demonstrates scalable computational performance, 
further 
accelerated 
through 
CPU-based 
parallel 
processing using the Intel MKL library [54]. Table 1 sum­
marises the computational cost for all tested models, 
showing that computation times remain manageable 
even for final spatial toolpaths containing over 496.8 k 
waypoints, with an input tetrahedral mesh of 255.8 k 
elements. In our implementation, the mesh density is 
determined according to the model size and was set 
to make average edge length at 1.2 mm to balance 
between 
computational 
efficiency 
and 
toolpath 
accuracy.
5.2. Materials and robot-assisted ESP setup
The robot-assisted multi-axis embedded silicone print­
ing platform used in this study is shown in Figure 10. 
The system integrates a six degrees-of-freedoms 
(DOFs) UR5e robotic arm, a mechanical screw-driven 
extrusion module, and a support bath to enable 
Figure 8. (a) Computational results of the customised vascular phantom containing both thin-shell and solid regions. (b) Compared 
with the planar-based solution, the multi-axis ESP approach preserves the geometric fidelity and printing quality of critical regions 
through the computation of curved layers. (c) Our iterative curved-slicing algorithm effectively controls the distribution of layer 
height, ensuring better material deposition and smooth surface transitions. (d) Staggered toolpaths computed on odd and even 
layers ensure stable extrusion and leak-free solid printing.
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
13
precise free-form fabrication. The support bath is pre­
pared by dissolving 0.5wt% Carbomer ETD2020 in 
deionised water, followed by pH neutralisation with 
NaOH and vacuum degassing. The two-component sili­
cone inks consists of: Part A mixed with 1.5wt% THI- 
VEX (3wt% for Ecoflex-0030) as a thickening agent, 
and Part B mixed with 1wt% Slo-Jo as a retarder. All 
silicone components are provided by SmoothOn but 
with different mechanical characteristics. Specifically, 
Ecoflex 0030 exhibits a Shore 00 hardness of 30 and 
a tensile strength of 200 psi. In contrast, Dragon Skin 
10 shows a Shore A hardness of 10 with a tensile 
strength of 471 psi, whereas Dragon Skin 30 exhibits 
a Shore A hardness of 30 and a tensile strength of 
420 psi.
Prior to printing, both components are pre-loaded 
into individual syringes and driven by compressed air 
into 
a 
dual-liquid 
screw 
extruder 
(Model 
600, 
Company Xinhui Automation Technology Co., Ltd.), 
which ensures continuous and precisely metered 
mixing. The extrusion rate is regulated by a dedicated 
extruder controller interfaced with the host computer 
via an Ethernet connection. As discussed in Section 
3.2, the extrusion rate is kept constant along the print­
ing at 6.57 mm3/s.
To achieve coordinated robot-extruder motion, we 
provide a motion-planning method that synchronises 
material extrusion with nozzle kinematics. The robot’s 
trajectory is generated from a series of waypoints (as 
defined in Equation (16)), where the desired end- 
effector velocity is computed and mapped into joint 
space by solving the differential kinematics using the 
manipulator Jacobian [55]. The solution is executed in 
real time through RoboDK [56] software (as shown on 
the PC monitor in Figure 10), which communicates vel­
ocity and position commands to the UR5e controller. 
This closed control loop ensures smooth multi-axis 
movement and stable material flow, allowing accurate 
spatial deposition and reliable control of the local 
material distribution.
Figure 9. (a) The conventional molding process for fabricating deformable membranes requires substantial manual labour (figure 
reproduced from [48], ©IEEE). (b) The mannequin chest model with inner free-form cavity represented by a two-layer tetrahedral 
mesh. (c) Slicing result with preservation of critical surfaces V1 −V4. (d) Staggered toolpath computed on odd and even layers. 
(e) Left: distribution of local layer heights within a single layer. Right: with deformation-based width control, issues of over- and 
under-extrusion are eliminated. For visualisation purposes, the toolpath cross-section is computed from the waypoint speed following 
Figure 2, where the cross-sectional height corresponds to the local layer height. (f) Cumulative distribution of path-width error with/ 
without width-based deformation.
Table 1. Statistics of tested models and computing time.
Models
Figure
Model size (mm)
Tet #
Computing time of (Sec.)
Layer #
Total time (Sec.)
Curved slicing
Spatial toolpath Comp.
Prosthetic socket
Figure 1
137 × 125 × 212
255.8 k
57.2
198.5
340
255.7
Soft robot
Figure 7
40 × 40 × 200
207.3 k
37.2
29.6
400
66.8
Aorta phantom
Figure 8
90 × 24 × 200
115.5 k
15.1
20.8
300
35.9
Mannequin chest
Figure 9
82 × 100 × 28
197.5 k
11.9
64.2
24
76.1
14 
H. SUN ET AL.
5.3. Fabrication result and characterisation
With the assistance of multi-axis motion from the robotic 
arm and precise synchronisation of micro-motor-driven 
extrusion, the computed spatial toolpaths for the 
models are fabricated, achieving accurate geometry and 
fulfilling their intended functions as free-from solid struc­
tures. All details of the physical printing process and phys­
ical validation can be found in the supplemental video. 
Notably, the spatial toolpaths with staggered patterns 
exceptionally ensure air-tightness for models designed 
for pneumatic actuation. The results for the soft robots 
are shown in Figure 11, where the cross-section demon­
strates that our method prevents local accumulation of 
excessive ink in solid areas. The thin-wall sections 
exhibit relatively uniform wall thickness, while the solid 
sections are fully dense and void-free, indicating that 
the staggered toolpath effectively provides infill. As 
shown in Figure 11(b–d), these soft robots were fabri­
cated with Ecoflex 0030 exhibit distinct deformation 
behaviours under low pressure, where the thin-wall 
regions expand under inflation, enabling the robots to 
exhibit different deformation patterns, such as bending 
and twisting under pressures of 6.5 kPa, 5 kPa, and 7  
kPa, respectively. Importantly, the proposed method is 
compatible with multiple silicone materials possessing 
different rheological and mechanical properties (as dis­
cussed in Section 3.1). Shown in Figure 11(e,f), S-shaped 
robots printed using Mold Star 30 and Dragon Skin 10 
also maintained stable morphology and air-tightness. 
Under the same pressure of 18 kPa, the softer one dis­
plays a larger bending curvature. These observations 
demonstrate that the proposed method enables reliable 
fabrication of comples soft devices from a wide range 
of materials, thereby offering strong versatility and scal­
ability for different functional and mechanical design 
requirements.
The successful fabrication of free-form soft mem­
branes is demonstrated in Figure 12, where the 
Figure 10. (a) Physical experiment setup of multi-axis ESP, where a 6-DOF robot arm is used to provide spatial material extrusion with 
synchronised motion along the extruder. (b) Fabrication process of the prosthetic socket model.
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
15
multi-axis printing process is showcased. As shown in 
Figure 12(a2) and (a3), the top layer of the base and 
the bottom layer of the top membrane successfully 
form a free-form chamber. The caved support gel is 
removed after printing when the air supply tube is 
extracted. The printed model is then placed on a solid 
PLA base, and when inflated with 10 kPa pressure, the 
constant-thickness model expand into an approximately 
spherical shape (Figure 12(b1)). In contrast, the variable- 
thickness model inflates into a morphology more closely 
resembling the human chest (Figure 12(b2)). Before and 
after inflation, the model can replicate chest mor­
phologies corresponding to different body types, as 
shown in Figure 12(c), and the surface shapes before 
Figure 12. (a) Multi-axis ESP process of a two-layer chest model with variable thickness where (a2) highlights the process formulation 
enclosed pneumatic chamber (detail can also be found in supplemental video). (b) The chest models present different shapes after 
inflation. Left: chest model with constant thickness; Right: chest model with variable thickness design (i.e. computational result shown 
in Figure 9) can better mimic the human chest shape and it allows the shape change from (c) human chest shape 1 (left) to human 
chest shape (right).
Figure 11. Printing results of soft robot models with various silicone materials. (a) printing process with robot-assisted ESP; (b) Longi­
tudinal cross-section of S-shaped soft robot and its inflated shape; (c) inflated twisting-type and (d) L-shaped soft robots; all three 
robots were fabricated from Ecoflex 0030 but with different internal designs. (e) Deformation of the S-shaped soft robot made 
from Mold Star 30 under different pressures; and (f) Deformation of S-shaped soft robots made from Dragon Skin 10 (left) and 
Mold Star 30 (right) under the same pressure.
16 
H. SUN ET AL.
and after deformation were validated using a 3D 
scanner. This confirms that our proposed multi-axis 
ESP method significantly enhances design freedom for 
free-form surfaces.
The physical fabrication of the aorta model is 
demonstrated in Figure 13. It can be seen that critical 
regions with large printing angles are protected with 
high surface finishing with the help of multi-axis 
motion, which ensures good material fusion and 
proper silicone extrusion using the computed spatial 
toolpath. We validated the fabricated models using 
both 3D scanner (for outer surface) and CT imaging 
(for internal porosity analyses). As shown in Figure 
13(c2), the 3D scanner results reveal a high degree 
of geometric conformity between the printed model 
and the original design, with the surface error less 
than 1.5 mm (1 % of the model size). Additionally, 
the CT scans provide detailed cross-sectional imaging 
and porosity analyses (Figure 13(c3)), demonstrating 
the ability of the designed toolpath to achieve excel­
lent infill performance with minimal voids (pore ratio: 
0.25%). These results confirm that the proposed 
multi-axis motion and toolpath planning method can 
successfully produce complex geometries with high 
precision and structural integrity.
We also demonstrate the effectiveness of the pro­
posed method compared with the planar-based sol­
ution, where the toolpath is generated by commercial 
software (e.g. Cura [57]). As shown in Figure 13(b), the 
conventional ESP toolpath resulted in inferior printing 
quality. As can be seen in the zoom-in region, for the 
top part, distinct over- and under-deposition defects 
are observed due to the absence of a volume-preser­
vation strategy. In addition, noticeable staircase effect 
and stringing defects appear on the printed surface 
due to the discontinuity of the toolpath. By comparing 
the dimensional error maps shown in Figure 13(b2) 
and (c2), it can be observed that the proposed multi- 
axis ESP method achieves markedly higher printing 
accuracy than conventional ESP, with the average error 
reduced from 0.49 mm to 0.2 mm, corresponding to a 
59 % improvement in dimensional accuracy.
The stability and reproducibility of the proposed 
printing process were evaluated by repeatedly fabricat­
ing the aorta model over multiple cycles. As shown in 
Figure 13(d), the error distributions from multiple print 
cycles are highly consistent, confirming the stable per­
formance of our method for complex silicone structures. 
These results demonstrate that the proposed multi-axis 
motion and toolpath-planning strategy can reliably 
Figure 13. (a) Multi-axis ESP process of the aorta model, where the spatial motion of the robot enables conformal printing to protect 
critical regions. (b) Printed result of conventional planar-based ESP shows improper ink deposition and obvious stringing defects in 
the critical region, which results in a larger dimensional error. (c) Printed result of our method showing good surface finishing, high 
geometry accuracy, and good infill performance – as evidenced by the CT scanning result in (c3). (d) Error distributions from multiple 
printing cycles. The three multi-axis printing cycles demonstrate excellent consistency and repeatability. Compared with conventional 
planar ESP, the multi-axis printing achieves higher dimensional accuracy, reducing the average error from 0.49 mm to 0.20 mm.
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
17
achieve high precision and structural integrity in complex 
geometries. This stability highlights the potential of our 
approach to support mass production of silicone phan­
toms for biomedical applications. Furthermore, the MRI 
signal characteristics of different tissues can be replicated 
by tuning the infill density during printing [58]. Although 
ESP may introduce more infill defects than conventional 
DIW when fabricating solid volumetric parts, it offers a 
distinct advantage: the ability to print tall, free-form, 
and anatomically accurate structures without distortion 
or collapse, making it particularly suitable for advanced 
MRI phantom fabrication.
5.4. Discussion
With the support of experiment result, we have demon­
strated that the width-constrained staggered toolpath 
can effectively promote more uniform ink distribution 
on curved layers with variable layer heights. However, 
due to the inherent characteristics of ESP, local ink 
over-deposition and pores caused by residual matrix 
material cannot be completely avoided, particularly in 
regions with complex geometry with sharp changes in 
local volume. Moreover, compared with thin-wall struc­
ture printing, volumetric printing using ESP requires 
more extensive nozzle movements, and the frequent 
motion of the nozzle may pull or disturb the surrounding 
matrix in three-dimensional space, potentially affecting 
the printed features and leading to manufacturing 
defects. A potential solution is the introduction of an 
in-situ monitoring system (e.g. the one reported for 
DIW [59]) to evaluate the printing process in real time 
and dynamically adjust printing parameters to compen­
sate for these inconsistencies, which represents an 
important direction for future exploration.
Another challenge arises from potential collisions 
between the printing nozzle and the material tank, 
especially when fabricating surfaces with large slopes 
or steep curvature. In this work, we employed a 6-DOF 
robotic arm to maintain a constant printing angle and 
ensure uniform filament morphology. However, when 
printing large-scale objects, collision avoidance and 
nozzle-orientation constraints together restrict the 
achievable printing size. A straightforward approach is 
to adjust the nozzle geometry based on the local 
surface orientation. For example, switching between 
different nozzle configurations, such as the 45◦or 90◦
nozzle designs introduced in [12], can help prevent 
interference by maintaining an optimal approach angle 
relative to the surface. On the other hand, advanced 
computational tool need to be developed to better 
place the model accordingly to the robotic position, 
reduce the potential of collision for this case.
Future work will extend the proposed framework to 
more diverse support matrix material and structures 
with greater geometric complexity [60, 61]. By integrat­
ing enhanced material compatibility with advanced 
spatial toolpath planning, the framework can broaden 
its range of applications. These capabilities will further 
enable the fabrication of complex functional soft 
devices, such as perceptive robots and biological 
tissues, thereby advancing the design freedom and 
overall performance of soft robotic and biomedical 
systems. Additionally, incorporating multi-material ESP 
[10, 41] together with the spatial printing proposed in 
this work would further enhance printing flexibility 
and reliability, particularly for fabricating functional 
and geometrically complex soft devices.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we presented a robot-assisted multi-axis 
embedded silicone printing platform capable of fabri­
cating high-fidelity volumetric models with minimised 
geometric distortion and eliminating staircase artifacts 
on curved surfaces. The proposed computational 
framework couples curved-layer slicing, printing-direc­
tion planning, and width-constrained toolpath gener­
ation to ensure uniform material distribution and 
continuous filament deposition across complex geo­
metries. Through the integration of high-DOF robotic 
motion and an ink-volume control mechanism, stable 
extrusion and accurate layer formation were achieved 
within a gel-based support medium. Experimental vali­
dation demonstrated that the printed structures 
closely matched their target designs, confirming the 
system’s ability to achieve solid infill, smooth surfaces, 
and consistent material fusion. This work greatly 
broadens the applicability of ESP toward fully volu­
metric free-form manufacturing and demonstrates its 
effectiveness in producing customised functional soft 
systems.
Notes
1. Their material properties are shown in Figure 2.
2. Available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17596817.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the technical team at Rapid 
Liquid Printing (RLP) for insightful discussions during the 
initial stage of this project, and the anonymous reviewers for 
their valuable comments. The authors acknowledge the 
support of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, the Hong 
Kong SAR Research Grants Council Early Career Scheme, 
and the Shenzhen basic research key project.Hailin Sun: 
18 
H. SUN ET AL.
Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal,analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. 
Yingjun,Tian: 
Visualization, 
Resources, 
Software, Methodology, Data curation, Conceptualization, 
Writing – review and,editing. Chenyu Xu: Visualization, 
Resources, Software, Writing – review and editing. Mahdi 
Bodaghi: Investigation, Methodology, Writing – review and 
editing. Fei,Gao: Data curation, Conceptualization, Funding 
acquisition, Writing – review and editing. Guoxin Fang:, 
Writing – review and editing, Writing – original draft, Supervi­
sion, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Conceptualization.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This research was supported by the Shun Hing Institute of 
Advanced Engineering at the Chinese University of Hong 
Kong (MMTp12-25), the Hong Kong SAR Research Grants 
Council Early Career Scheme (RGC-ECS) (CUHK/24204924), 
and Shenzhen basic research key project (Project No. 
JCYJ20220818101407016).
Author contributions
CRediT: Hailin Sun: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal 
analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, 
Visualization, Writing – original draft; Yingjun Tian: Data cura­
tion, Methodology, Resources, Software, Visualization, Writing 
– review & editing; Chenyu Xu: Resources, Software, Visualiza­
tion, Writing – review & editing; Mahdi Bodaghi: Investigation, 
Methodology, Writing – review & editing; Fei Gao: Conceptu­
alization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Writing – review 
& editing; Guoxin Fang: Conceptualization, Funding acqui­
sition, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Super­
vision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & 
editing.
Data availability statement
The raw test data (generated sliced layer and toolpath) sup­
porting the findings of this study are openly available in 
Zenodo at: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17596694.
The supplemental video of this work can be found at: 
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17596817.
ORCID
Hailin Sun 
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7251-2860
Yingjun Tian 
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9213-2179
Chenyu Xu 
http://orcid.org/0009-0001-2808-2664
Mahdi Bodaghi 
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0707-944X
Fei Gao 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9637-6114
Guoxin Fang 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8741-3227
References
[1] Shit SC, Shah P. A review on silicone rubber. National 
Acad Sci Lett. 2013;36(4):355–365. doi: 10.1007/s40009- 
013-0150-2
[2] Khas KS, Pandey PM, Ray AR. Rapid manufacturing of a 
clubfoot model imitating soft tissue and bones. Virtual 
Phys 
Prototyp. 
2013;8(3):187–192. 
doi: 
10.1080/ 
17452759.2013.836455
[3] Mohammed MI, Cadd B, Peart G, et al. Augmented patient- 
specific facial prosthesis production using medical 
imaging modelling and 3d printing technologies for 
improved patient outcomes. Virtual Phys Prototyp. 
2018;13(3):164–176. doi: 10.1080/17452759.2018.1446122
[4] Pfeil S, Katzer K, Kanan A, et al. A biomimetic fish fin-like 
robot 
based 
on 
textile 
reinforced 
silicone. 
Micromachines. 2020;11(3):298. doi: 10.3390/mi11030298
[5] Bell MA, Becker KP, Wood RJ. Injection molding of soft 
robots. Adv Mater Technol. 2022;7(1):2100605. doi: 10. 
1002/admt.v7.1
[6] Liravi F, Toyserkani E. Additive manufacturing of silicone 
structures: A review and prospective. Addit Manuf. 
2018;24:232–242.
[7] Yang Z, Zhu W, Shi J, et al. Rapid in-situ thermal curing 3d 
printing of engineering thermosetting resins. Virtual Phys 
Prototyp. 2025;20(1):e2553180. doi: 10.1080/17452759. 
2025.2553180
[8] Zhao J, He N. A mini-review of embedded 3d printing: 
supporting media and strategies. J Mater Chem B. 
2020;8(46):10474–10486. doi: 10.1039/D0TB01819H
[9] Zeng X, Meng Z, Qiu Z, et al. Melt-based embedded print­
ing for freeform fabrication of overhanging and flexible 
polycaprolactone 
scaffolds. 
Virtual 
Phys 
Prototyp. 
2023;18(1):e2209778. 
doi: 
10.1080/17452759.2023. 
2209778
[10] Li Y, Wu Z, Chen Y, et al. Multi-material embedded 3d 
printing for one-step manufacturing of multifunctional 
components 
in 
soft 
robotics. 
Addit 
Manuf. 
2024;85:104178.
[11] Calais T, Sanandiya ND, Jain S, et al. Freeform liquid 3d 
printing of soft functional components for soft robotics. 
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2021;14(1):2301–2315. doi: 
10.1021/acsami.1c20209
[12] Wang Z, Zhang B, He Q, et al. Multimaterial embedded 3d 
printing of composite reinforced soft actuators. Research. 
2023;6:0122. doi: 10.34133/research.0122
[13] Sparrman B, Du Pasquier C, Thomsen C, et al. Printed sili­
cone pneumatic actuators for soft robotics. Addit Manuf. 
2021;40:101860.
[14] Albert BJ, Wang C, Williams C, et al. Non-planar 
embedded 3d printing for complex hydrogel manufactur­
ing. Bioprinting. 2022;28:e00242. doi: 10.1016/j.bprint. 
2022.e00242
[15] Arun ND, Yang H, Yao L, et al. Nonplanar 3d printing of 
epoxy using freeform reversible embedding. Adv Mater 
Technol. 2023;8(7):2201542. doi: 10.1002/admt.v8.7
[16] Shojaei Barjuei E, Shin J, Kim K, et al. High-precision multi- 
axis robotic printing: optimized workflow for complex 
tissue creation. Bioengineering. 2025;12(9):949. doi: 10. 
3390/bioengineering12090949
[17] Grosskopf AK, Truby RL, Kim H, et al. Viscoplastic matrix 
materials for embedded 3d printing. ACS Appl Mater 
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
19
Interfaces. 
2018;10(27):23353–23361. 
doi: 
10.1021/ 
acsami.7b19818
[18] Hua W, Zhang C, Mitchell K, et al. Filament formation 
mechanisms in yield-stress fluid-enabled embedded ink 
writing. Addit Manuf. 2024;91:104353.
[19] Bhattacharjee T, Zehnder SM, Rowe KG, et al. Writing in 
the granular gel medium. Sci Adv. 2015;1(8):e1500655. 
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1500655
[20] Song K, Compaan AM, Chai W, et al. Injectable gelatin 
microgel-based composite ink for 3d bioprinting in air. 
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2020;12(20):22453–22466. 
doi: 10.1021/acsami.0c01497
[21] Jin Y, Song K, Gellermann N, et al. Printing of hydrophobic 
materials in fumed silica nanoparticle suspension. ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces. 2019;11(32):29207–29217. doi: 10. 
1021/acsami.9b07433
[22] Rapid Liquid Print. Rapid liquid print; 2024 [accessed 2024 
Jul 12]. Available from: https://www.rapidliquidprint. 
com/
[23] Menon A, Póczos B, Feinberg AW, et al. Optimization of 
silicone 3d printing with hierarchical machine learning. 
3D Printing Addit Manuf. 2019;6(4):181–189. doi: 10. 
1089/3dp.2018.0088
[24] Greenwood TE, Hatch SE, Colton MB, et al. 3d printing 
low-stiffness silicone within a curable support matrix. 
Addit Manuf. 2021;37:101681.
[25] Zhao J, Hussain M, Wang M, et al. Embedded 3d printing 
of multi-internal surfaces of hydrogels. Addit Manuf. 
2020;32:101097.
[26] Young CA, O’Bannon M, Thomson SL. Three-dimensional 
printing of ultrasoft silicone with a functional stiffness 
gradient. 3D Printing Addit Manuf. 2024;11(2):435–445. 
doi: 10.1089/3dp.2022.0218
[27] Kubalak JR, Wicks AL, Williams CB. Using multi-axis 
material extrusion to improve mechanical properties 
through surface reinforcement. Virtual Phys Prototyp. 
2018;13(1):32–38. doi: 10.1080/17452759.2017.1392686
[28] Ye J, Guo Q, Lu H, et al. Topology optimisation of self-sup­
porting structures based on the multi-directional 
additive 
manufacturing 
technique. 
Virtual 
Phys 
Prototyp. 2023;18(1):e2271458. doi: 10.1080/17452759. 
2023.2271458
[29] Huang J, Ware HOT, Hai R, et al. Conformal geometry and 
multimaterial additive manufacturing through freeform 
transformation 
of 
building 
layers. 
Adv 
Mater. 
2021;33(11):2005672. doi: 10.1002/adma.v33.11
[30] Dai C, Liu T, Guo D, et al. Curve-based slicer for multi-axis 
dlp 
3d 
printing. 
ACM 
Trans 
Graphics 
(TOG). 
2025;44(6):194–14doi: 10.1145/3763352
[31] Fang G, Zhang T, Huang Y, et al. Exceptional mechanical 
performance by spatial printing with continuous fiber: 
curved slicing, toolpath generation and physical verifica­
tion. Addit Manuf. 2024;82:104048.
[32] Gao S, Liao W-H, Guo P. Development of a multi- 
directional metal 3d printing system based on direct 
metal 
deposition. 
In: 
International 
Manufacturing 
Science and Engineering Conference, Vol. 58745. Erie 
(PA): 
American 
Society 
of 
Mechanical 
Engineers; 
2019. p. V001T01A014.
[33] Goh GL, Dikshit V, Koneru R, et al. Fabrication of design- 
optimized multifunctional safety cage with conformal cir­
cuits for drone using hybrid 3d printing technology. Int J 
Advanced Manuf Technol. 2022;120(3):2573–2586. doi: 
10.1007/s00170-022-08831-y
[34] Mendoza-Bautista KJ, Flores-Jimenez MS, Vázquez Tejeda 
Serrano LD, et al. Collaborative heterogeneous mini- 
robotic 3d printer for manufacturing complex food struc­
tures with multiple inks and curved deposition surfaces. 
Micromachines. 2025;16(3):264. doi: 10.3390/mi16030264
[35] Zhang Z, Wu C, Dai C, et al. A multi-axis robot-based bio­
printing system supporting natural cell function preser­
vation and cardiac tissue fabrication. Bioactive Mater. 
2022;18:138–150. doi: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.02.009
[36] Hajash K, Sparrman B, Guberan C, et al. Large-scale rapid 
liquid printing. 3D Printing Addit Manuf. 2017;4(3):123– 
132. doi: 10.1089/3dp.2017.0037
[37] Duraivel S, Laurent D, Rajon DA, et al. A silicone-based 
support material eliminates interfacial instabilities in 3d 
silicone printing. Science. 2023;379(6638):1248–1252. 
doi: 10.1126/science.ade4441
[38] Etienne J, Ray N, Panozzo D, et al. Curvislicer: slightly 
curved slicing for 3-axis printers. ACM Trans Graphics 
(TOG). 2019;38(4):1–11. doi: 10.1145/3306346.3323022
[39] Guerra A, Fortunato GM, Bonatti AF, et al. A cylindrical 
slicing algorithm for four-axis non-planar bioprinting of 
complex geometries. Int J Bioprinting. 2025;11(2):494– 
509. doi: 10.36922/IJB025070053
[40] Qu J, Huang Z, Guo D, et al. Inf-3dp: implicit neural fields 
for collision-free multi-axis 3d printing. ACM Trans 
Graphics (TOG). 2025;44(6):1–18. doi: 10.1145/3763354
[41] Wang Z, Zhang B, Cui W, et al. Freeform fabrication of 
pneumatic soft robots via multi-material jointed direct 
ink writing. Macromol Mater Eng. 2022;307(4):2100813. 
doi: 10.1002/mame.v307.4
[42] Fang G, Zhang T, Zhong S, et al. Reinforced fdm: multi- 
axis filament alignment with controlled anisotropic 
strength. ACM Trans Graphics (TOG). 2020;39(6):1–15. 
doi: 10.1145/3414685.3417834
[43] Dutta N, Zhang T, Fang G, et al. Vector field-based volume 
peeling for multi-axis machining. J Comput Inf Sci Eng. 
2024;24(5):051001. doi: 10.1115/1.4063861
[44] Crane K, Weischedel C, Wardetzky M. The heat method for 
distance computation. Commun ACM. 2017;60(11):90–99. 
doi: 10.1145/3131280
[45] Knöppel F, Crane K, Pinkall U, et al. Stripe patterns on sur­
faces. ACM Trans Graphics (TOG). 2015;34(4):1–11. doi: 10. 
1145/2767000
[46] Zhang T, Liu T, Dutta N, et al. Toolpath generation 
for high density spatial fiber printing guided by 
principal stresses. Composites Part B: Engineering. 
2025;295:112154. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.compositesb.2025. 
112154
[47] Liu L, Zhang L, Xu Y, et al. A local/global approach to 
mesh parameterization. In: Computer graphics forum, 
Vol. 27. Copenhagen: Wiley Online Library; 2008. 
p. 1495–1504.
[48] Tian Y, Fang G, Petrulis JS, et al. Soft robotic mannequin: 
design and algorithm for deformation control. IEEE ASME 
Trans Mechatron. 2022;27(4):1820–1828. doi: 10.1109/ 
TMECH.2022.3175759
[49] Zhong Z, Wang W, Lévy B, et al. Computing a high-dimen­
sional euclidean embedding from an arbitrary smooth 
riemannian 
metric. 
ACM 
Trans 
Graphics 
(TOG). 
2018;37(4):1–16. doi: 10.1145/3197517.3201369
20 
H. SUN ET AL.
[50] Guennebaud G, Jacob B. Eigen v3.3; 2019 [accessed 2024 
Aug 6]. Available from: http://eigen.tuxfamily.org
[51] Fang Y, Guo Y, Wu B, et al. Expanding embedded 3d bio­
printing capability for engineering complex organs with 
freeform vascular networks. Adv Mater. 2023;35(22): 
2205082. doi: 10.1002/adma.v35.22
[52] Scharff RB, Fang G, Tian Y, et al. Sensing and reconstruc­
tion of 3-d deformation on pneumatic soft robots. IEEE 
ASME Trans Mechatron. 2021;26(4):1877–1885. doi: 10. 
1109/TMECH.2021.3078263
[53] Li S, Xie B, Chen Y, et al. Design and 3d printing of lower 
limb prosthetic socket. In: 2024 IEEE International 
Conference on Cyborg and Bionic Systems (CBS). 
Nagoya: IEEE; 2024. p. 27–32.
[54] Wang E, Zhang Q, Shen B, et al. Intel math kernel library. 
In: High-Performance Computing on the Intel® Xeon 
Phi
TM: How to Fully Exploit MIC Architectures. Cham: 
Springer; 2014. p. 167–188.
[55] Chen Y, Zhang T, Huang Y, et al. Co-optimization of tool 
orientations, kinematic redundancy, and waypoint 
timing for robot-assisted manufacturing. IEEE Trans 
Autom Sci Eng. 2025;22:12102–12117. doi: 10.1109/ 
TASE.2025.3542218
[56] Robodk. Robodk: simulator for robot arms and offline 
programming. Available from: https://robodk.com/
[57] Ultimaker cura. Available from: https://ultimaker.com/ 
software/ultimaker-cura/
[58] Hatamikia S, Zaric O, Jaksa L, et al. Evaluation of 3d- 
printed silicone phantoms with controllable mri signal 
properties. Int J Bioprinting. 2025;11(3):381–396.
[59] Mejia EB, McDougall L, Gonsalves N, et al. Real-time process 
monitoring and automated control for direct ink write 3d 
printing of frontally polymerizing thermosets. npj Adv 
Manuf. 2025;2(1):18. doi: 10.1038/s44334-025-00032-1
[60] Wang X, Li Z, Deng J, et al. Unprecedented strength 
enhancement observed in interpenetrating phase com­
posites of aperiodic lattice metamaterials. Adv Funct 
Mater. 2025;35(1):2406890. doi: 10.1002/adfm.v35.1
[61] Wang X, Li X, Li Z, et al. Superior strength, toughness, and 
damage-tolerance observed in microlattices of aperiodic 
unit cells. Small. 2024;20(23):2307369. doi: 10.1002/smll. 
v20.23
VIRTUAL AND PHYSICAL PROTOTYPING 
21
